Once called the Royal Disease,
hemophilia is an inherited bleeding disorder.
Those who have it lack a protein,
called a clotting factor,
which is required for blood to clot.
Your body has several clotting factors
which are all necessary for proper blood clotting.
When you cut your skin or a blood vessel
a series of reactions occur
to activate clotting factors and platelets.
This creates a kind of glue
that forms a clot that acts like a plug.
When a clotting factor is missing,
the chain reaction is disrupted,
so it takes longer for bleeding to stop.
This means a person bleeds longer
after an injury and sometimes
bleeds without an obvious cause.
Over time, internal bleeding
can damage tissues and organs.
About 70-80% of bleeding incidents
involve the joints and can cause
damage similar to arthritis.
The first treatments for hemophilia
involved transfusions of the missing
factor from donor blood.
In the 1980s, many of those treated
became infected with HIV and hepatitis.
Fortunately, that risk has been virtually eliminated
by new screening procedures and technologies.
Scientists have also figured out
how to create synthetic blood factors
by cloning natural genes
responsible for their production.
And there are ongoing efforts
to remove all human and animal proteins
from treatments for hemophilia.